---
layout: post
title: "Automated literature searches with Google Scholar"
tags:
    - python
    - tools
categories: python tools
--- 
Google Scholar is an amazing tool for looking up academic papers, it's my go-to
whether I need to find a particular paper or just explore the existing literature 
on some topic.
One thing I've always wanted to be able to do is specify a list of articles I'm
interested in and get a tailored set of recommendations based on just those papers.
If you make an account on Google Scholar you do get recommendations, but
the current setup works more like Netflix before they introduced separate
profiles: the recommendations are a
mashup of articles related to all the different topics you've searched for
(or published on, if you link your papers to your account).

[bibcheck.py](https://github.com/hinnefe2/bibcheck.py) is a home-grown 
implementation of this feature. It takes as input a BibTeX bibliography 
(.bib) file and outputs a list of papers that might be relevant to the papers 
contained in the bibliography.

The recommendations are generated by [triangle closing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triadic_closure). 
Briefly, we consider each paper in the bibliography as a node in a network, 
along with the bibliography itself. Edges connect the bibliography to each 
paper it cites. Each cited paper also has edges connecting it to other papers 
which include it in their bibliographies. To make recommendations, the code 
searches for other nodes, which when connected to the node of the supplied 
bibliography, would create multiple triangles in the network. 

A more intuitive example: if you know Alice, Bob, Carol, and Dan, and Elise 
knows Bob, Carol, and Dan, then you are likely to know Elise. A hypothetical 
link between you and Elise would create three new triangles: (you, Bob, Elise), 
(you, Carol, Elise), and (you, Dan, Elise). 

There are certainly more sophisticated ways to make recommendations, but even
this simple method generates useful results. An example output is shown below:

    >>> bibcheck.py -rmax 80 test.bib
    Trying to get cluster ID for article 42/42
    Getting citations for article 10/10
    Citations shared   Title
    3                  Facile formation of graphene p–n junctions using self-assembled monolayers
    2                  Voltage-Controlled Ferroelastic Switching in Pb (Zr0. 2Ti0. 8) O3 Thin Films
    2                  Photochemical doping and tuning of the work function and dirac point in graphene using photoacid and photobase generators
    2                  Homo-and Hetero-p–n Junctions Formed on Graphene Steps
    2                  Optoelectrical Molybdenum Disulfide (MoS2) Ferroelectric Memories
    2                  Orientation-dependent structural phase diagrams and dielectric properties of PbZr 1− x Ti x O 3 polydomain thin films

The script found all 42 papers in the bibliography. Of those 42, 10 had fewer
than 80 citations (this limit is to exclude review and other highly cited articles, first
because searching for all of their citing articles would take forever, and second because
shared citations of review articles don't carry much information). For each of those 10
articles, the script found the title of every citing article, and finally searched for 
commonalities.

For this example I used the bibliography from a paper titled 'Single Gate PN 
Junctions in Graphene-Ferroelectric Devices'. Without knowing anything about the content
of the paper we can see that the recommendations are pretty relevant.

bibcheck.py is built on top of a couple great python libraries; thanks to 
[ckreibich](https://github.com/ckreibich) for building 
[scholar.py](https://github.com/ckreibich/scholar.py) and to 
[sciunto](https://github.com/sciunto) for building 
[python-bibtexparser](https://github.com/sciunto/python-bibtexparser).

If you want to give it a try head on over the the [github repository](https://github.com/hinnefe2/bibcheck.py).
